---
title: 'Simplicity'
date: 2025-10-09
---

I am naturally drawn towards simplicity.

It attracts me because I can keep simple systems in my head to be confident
about how they work. Because _less_ simplicity hinders their ability to evolve,
to adapt, to change. Because complexity is costly, slow, and it _decreases our
options_.

In the context of [evolution stages][0], the closer we are to _genesis_, the
more important simplicity is.

At _genesis_, the world and our product market fit are uncertain. Everything is
novel. We want to be able to quickly _pivot_ our direction when we find our
hypotheses falsified or we spot a competitive advantage. Simplicity fuels all
that, allowing us to focus on _what matters_ instead of being bogged down. It
is harder for _legacy_ to hold us back, when we keep things simple.

As we evolve through _custom-built_ stages and later into _products_, the
inherent complexity of the world or our business will catch up with us. More
adoption will require us (to consider) handling more edge cases, serving more
personas, and scaling what we do. By then, we'll have to give away _some_
simplicity. But only as little as possible.

#### In practice

This shows up all around us, we just need to look for it.

Recently, a young organization that I am close to had to organize a
conference-like event. They had to collect abstracts for talks, establish a
website for the event, and had no previous experience doing any of this. They
_expected_ hundreds of participants to submit their abstracts and had heard
that manually organizing them would be painful. So they opted for letting users
submit abstracts through a Wordpress form.

But right then, Wordpress itself introduced artificial complexity and became a
limitation to their ability to experiment with other tools or ways to build a
website, for instance through easier or more friendly frontends.

Allowing users to submit abstracts through emails, instead, would have been a
simpler choice. It would have maintained open their options for a website and
allowed them to delay complexity until later, when _sorting_ the abstracts.
Something in which they had far more experience, was less uncertain in its
execution, and would easily scale to the number of organizers involved. Plus,
it would have allowed them not to optimise on their _expectation_ of hundreds
of abstracts submitted, but react to it in case the numbers were in fact
significant.

[0]: https://www.wardleymaps.com/glossary/evolution-stages
