---
layout: post
title: Nexus 5X - Marshmallow - MAC spoofing
excerpt: >
    How to change the MAC address of your LG Nexus 5X.
modified: 2016-01-03
categories: articles
tags: [android, marshmallow, nexus, 5x, mac, spoofing]
comments: true
share: true
---

I recently bought a new LG Nexus 5X and I was looking for a simple way to permanently change (*spoof*) the MAC address of the built-in WLAN adapter.
It ships with `Android Marshmallow 6.0.1` and, as far as I've seen, outdated guides did not work.

Let's get to work.

## Requirements

You'll need a `rooted` device and working `ADB` access on your machine.
`busybox` is not mandatory, but if you want to follow my exact steps you'll need it.
It also allows to make a backup of the previous MAC address, so I definitely advice you to [get it](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=stericson.busybox&hl=it).

## Disclaimer
As usual, I won't be responsible for any action you intend to perform on your device.
At any rate, I've successfully managed to spoof the MAC address of my phone without any noticeable problem.

## The spoofing itself

Enable the `USB debugging` on your device, connect it to your PC and check that everything works as expected.

{% highlight bash %}
» adb devices
List of devices attached
[redacted]	device
{% endhighlight %}

The WLAN MAC address is stored inside the `/persist` partition of your device.
More info about it can be found [here](http://forum.xda-developers.com/google-nexus-5/general/guide-to-fix-persist-partition-t2821576).

First of all, I advice you to take a backup.
I'm using the `tar` tool, that you may not have without a working `busybox` install.

{% highlight bash %}
» adb shell
shell@bullhead:/ $ su
root@bullhead:/ # cd /persist/
root@bullhead:/persist # ls -la
-rw-rw---- bluetooth bluetooth       17 1969-12-31 20:01 bdaddr.txt
drw-r-x--- input    system            1969-12-31 19:56 calibration
drwx------ system   system            1970-02-11 09:38 data
drwx------ root     root              1969-12-31 19:00 lost+found
-rw-r----- root     system        121 1969-12-31 19:55 sensorcal.json
drwxrwx--- drm      system            1969-12-31 20:01 widevine
-rw-rw---- wifi     system        116 2016-01-03 19:59 wlan_mac.bin
root@bullhead:/persist # tar -zcvf /sdcard/persist_backup.tar.gz .
./
./lost+found/
./data/
./data/sfs/
./data/sfs/U6Gno760ZM24B0p9bVVAfWlpN18_
./data/sfs/ONAfupniDQclyd+6sL8DWUyHKTI_
./data/sfs/Hi8Tz8W0bXUB4uoqPe3f39li2kc_
./data/tz/
./data/tz/tz_counter
./data/tz/tz_counter.bak
./data/app_g/
./widevine/
./widevine/index.txt
./calibration/
./calibration/cnt
./calibration/offset
./wlan_mac.bin
./sensorcal.json
./bdaddr.txt
root@bullhead:/persist #
{% endhighlight %}

You should now have a backup of the partition, called `persist_backup.tar.gz` in the root of your `/sdcard`.
At this point, let's take a look at the `/persist/wlan_mac.bin` file:

{% highlight bash %}
root@bullhead:/persist # cat wlan_mac.bin
Intf0MacAddress=[redacted]
Intf1MacAddress=[redacted]
Intf2MacAddress=[redacted]
Intf3MacAddress=[redacted]
{% endhighlight %}

As you can see, I redacted the actual addresses, but you can edit the file by yourself (you'll specifically need to edit the `Intf0MacAddress` line) with your MAC address of choice.
If you are comfortable with `vi` and you have `busybox` installed, you can edit the file in place.
Otherwise, you can `adb pull` it, edit and then `adb push` it - Remembering to fix its permissions after the push.

After a reboot (`adb reboot`), you'll start using the address.

Please note that, this way, you'll have a fixed MAC address that persists over reboots.
If you prefer to randomly generate a new one, you could write a small script to replace it by using something similar to the `/etc/init.d` scripts.

## Bonus: BT MAC Spoofing

The `/persist/bdaddr.txt` file contains the MAC address of your BT adapter.
You could perform analogous steps and spoof it too.
