---
title: 'Shell pipes and readline completion'
excerpt: >
  How I re-discovered that completion won't work if stdin is not a terminal (TTY).
---

On what seemed random occasions, `readline` completion would break in my
terminal (e.g., when trying to use `pdb` after setting a Python `breakpoint()`),
just to restart working later on.

I originally thought about my `TERM` variables being misconfigured, the use of
`direnv`, and so on. But it was none of that.

On a closer look, it only happened when running `make extract` to process
Beancount transactions from bank statements and financial documents. Why?

The Makefile `extract` target looks as follows:

```txt
extract:
  $(RUN) bean-extract -f $(INDEX).beancount -e $(INDEX).beancount $(INDEX).import "$(EXPANDED_TARGET)" | tee /tmp/extracted.beancount
```

As you can see, it calls `bean-extract` and then pipes the result to a file. On
occasions where the process would fail (under the hood, it calls a bunch of
Python script that parse the different documents), I'd throw a `breakpoint()`,
get into `pdb` and be annoyed by the lack of completion.

Other times, I'd run the command directly -- and readline completion would work,
deepening the mystery.

It then dawned on me. In retrospect, it is obvious, and I should have noticed
earlier: well-behaved Unix processes will detect that their standard input is
not a terminal and disable shell completion (often implemented through GNU
`readline`).

For CPython, I _think_ the relevant code is
[here](https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/71ae93374defd192e5e88fe0912eff4f8e56f286/Parser/myreadline.c#L2).
Entering text into a terminal is [indeed
complicated](https://jvns.ca/blog/2024/07/08/readline/).

Mystery solved! Below you can see the behavior in action (you'll need Javascript
enabled, or you can see it [here](https://asciinema.org/a/FpGU25luEC4q30STLGw4Lj0fX)):

<script src="https://asciinema.org/a/FpGU25luEC4q30STLGw4Lj0fX.js" id="asciicast-FpGU25luEC4q30STLGw4Lj0fX" async="true"></script>
